Often the data that you load into R,
will not necessarily be tidy.
It will shaped in some strange way, or
there will be a variable in a row, or
there will be something else going on.
And so, the first thing that
you might need to do is reshape
the data into the format that
you'd like to have it in.
So the goal remember, is tidy data.
So, tidy data has several principles,
for example,
we would like every variable
to form its own column.
Every observation to form its own row.
And each table or file to store data
about only one kind of observation.
We're gonna focus on the first two
components of this when we're doing
data reshaping.
So, we're gonna start off by
looking at this mtcars data set.
So this is a data set that's one
of the standard data sets in R.
And so, we have a bunch of different
cars over here in the rows.
And then there's a bunch of different
variables that we've observed about them.
Their MPG, the number of cylinders,
the horsepower, and so forth.
And so what we're gonna do is deal
with reshaping this data a little bit.
So the first thing that we can do
is we can melt the data set, and so
when we're melting a data set, what we're
gonna do is we're gonna pass the data
frame that we have mtcars, we're gonna
actually pass it to this melt function.
And we're gonna tell it which of
the variables are ID variables, and
which of the variables
are measure variables.
And so what that can do then is it's
going to create a bunch of ID values.
And so for example it's going to
create an id value for car name, for
gear and for cylinders, because we've
said those are id variables here.
And then it's going to basically
melt all the rest of the values.
So this is a very tall,
skinny data frame so
that in this variable column,
you will see both mpg and hp.
So it's basically reshaped the data set so
that it's tall and
skinny and so there's one row for
every mpg and one row for every hp.
So for example, at the top of this data
set, we see it's only the mpg values, and
at the bottom of the data set
we see it's only the hp values.
This is now a tall, skinny data set.
So once we've melted the data set we can
recast it in a bunch of different ways.
We can basically reformat the data
set into different sort of shapes.
So to do that we're gonna
use the dcast function.
The dcast function will recast
the data set into a particular shape,
into a particular data frame.
So here, what we're going to do is,
we're gonna pass it the melted data set,
the car melted data set.
And suppose, for example,
that we wanted to see the cylinders,
and we wanted to see that broken
down by the different variables.
What this will do is, it's going to
put the different values on the left
hand side, in the rows, and
its going to put the values in
the right hand side in the columns.
So on the right hand side it's variable,
remember for
variable we said it was mpg and hp so
you get that in the two columns here.
And then in the rows we get
the different cylinders going down here.
And the thing that it does is
it summarizes the data set so
you can see this data set is much
smaller than the original data set, and,
by default, it does it by link.
So it says is that, for 4 cylinders,
we have 11 measures of mpg and
11 measures of horsepower, for
6 cylinders, we have 7 measures of mpg and
7 measures of horsepower, and so forth.
We can also pass it a different function,
a different way to summarize the data.
So again, if we tell it to recast
the data in this way it'll put
cylinders in the rows and
the variable in the columns, and
then what we can tell it to do
is take the mean for each value.
So for example, now we can say,
for the four cylinder car,
the mean miles per gallon is 26.66 and
the mean horsepower is 82.64.
Meanwhile, for an eight cylinder car,
there's a much lower mean miles per
gallon and a much higher horsepower.
And so, what this is basically doing is,
it's taking the data set and
resummarizing it in different ways,
and reorganizing it in different ways.
Another thing that you might wanna do is
average values within a particular factor.
So, this is a very common thing to do.
So, this is now looking at
a insect sprays data set.
So, what we have now is
different kinds of sprays.
So, in this case, the spray is A, or
B, or C, or D, or E or F and then it's
the count of the number of insects that
you see with that different spray,
and so one thing that you might want
to do is take the sum of the count of
insects that you see for
each of the different sprays.
So to do that what you could do is you
could take the insect count variable and
pass it to tapply.
And you could say, I would like to tapply,
that means apply along an index,
a particular function.
So I'm going to apply to count along
the index spray, the function sum.
What that's gonna do is, within each value
of spray, it will sum up the counts,
so you get the sum for A and
the sum for B and the sum for C.
That's one very brief,
shorthand way of calculating those sums.
Another way is what's called split,
apply, combine.
So, you can imagine that what you
wanna do is, you wanna take the insect
spray counts and you want to split them
up by each of the different sprays.
So you can do that with
the split function and R and
what you end up now is with a list,
where you get the list of the values for
A, the list of the values for B,
the list of the values for C and so forth.
So that's the split part of
the split apply component.
Then what you can do is you can
apply to that list a function.
So here we have the list
of different values for
each of the different sprays, and we can
use lapply to apply across that list.
So each element of your list,
we're going to apply the sum.
So again, we get the same values out,
we've summed up the counts for A,
summed up the counts for B,
summed up the counts C and so forth.
And now we actually have a list but
we may wanna go back to a vector so
that it's easier to manipulate on our.
And so then, we do combining.
We basically unlist the list that we got
when we did the apply after the split.
One thing that will combine
a couple of those steps together,
so after you've taken the data and
you've split it up,
you can actually just use the s apply
command which will do both the apply and
the combine components of this split,
apply, combine.
The plyr package provides a nice interface
for doing this sort of action in one step.
So, we take the Insect Sprays data set and
we path it to the function ddply.
And then what we do is we say, okay,
these are the variables that we'd like to
summarize, and you have to use dot and
then parentheses, so that you don't have
to use quote quotation marks around spray.
Then you're going to say we want
to summarize this variable.
And how do we want to summarize it,
we want to provide a sum.
So basically we sum up the count
of within that spray variable.
And you get C here.
The same sort of process has been applied,
a split applied the buying process.
This is kind of nice because you can
also use it to calculate the values and
apply them to each variable.
So for example, suppose you wanna
be able to subtract off the mean,
or the total count from the actual
count for every variable,
what you could do is you
could actually calculate
A spraySums variable that's the same
length as the original data set.
So again I ask ddply,
the InsectSprays data frame,
and I say I wanna summarize
the spray variable and
I wanna summarize the counts and
I wanna sum them up.
But now I've passed it ave function, so
when I say sum here,
I'm actually calculating the sum as
the ave function applied to count
where the subfunction is sum.
And so what ends up happening is spraySuns
ends up being the same dimension
as the original InsectSprays data set.
So for every time I see an A in the spray,
I get the sum for all of the A values.
So in other words, instead of having
a data set where you just see the sum for
A once, you see the sum for A for every
value of A in the data set and so that now
this variable can be added to the data
set and used to do different analysis.
For more information on how to reshape
data, you can see the plyr tutorial.
There's also a really nice reshaped
tutorial here on slideshare.
And a good plyr primer
is on our bloggers here.
So other functions that you might wanna
be aware of are acast, which just like we
were using dcast a minute ago to take
a melted data set and turn it into
a data frame, acast turns it into
an array possibly multiple dimensional.
And then a range you can for
reordering data sets without using
the order commands like we saw in previous
lectures, just like you can use
mutate to add new variables.
So you can use a combination of ddply and
mutate in order to add new variables that
are summaries of their previous variables.